DX-729 - OTel improvements & Datadog guide (#3321)
TykTechnologies/tyk-docs: tyk-docs/content/product-stack/tyk-gateway/advanced-configurations/distributed-tracing/open-telemetry/open-telemetry-overview.md

---
title: "OpenTelemetry Integration with Tyk Gateway"
date: 2023-08-29T10:28:52+03:00
tags: ["otel", "opentelemetry"]
description: Overview page to introduce OpenTelemetry in Tyk
---

> Starting from Tyk Gateway version 5.2, you can leverage the power of OpenTelemetry, an open-source observability framework designed for cloud-native software, to enhance your API monitoring with end-to-end distributed tracing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Starting from Tyk Gateway version 5.2, you can leverage the power of OpenTelemetry, an open-source observability framework designed for cloud-native software. This enhances your API monitoring with end-to-end distributed tracing.
```

This documentation will guide you through the process of enabling and configuring OpenTelemetry in Tyk Gateway. You'll also learn how to customize trace detail levels to meet your monitoring requirements.

> For further guidance on configuring your observability back-end, explore our guides for [Datadog]({{< ref "otel_datadog" >}}), [Dynatrace]({{< ref "otel_dynatrace" >}}), [Jaeger]({{< ref "otel_jaeger" >}}), and [New Relic]({{< ref "otel_new_relic" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For further guidance on configuring your observability back-end, explore our guides for [Datadog]({{< ref "otel_datadog" >}}), [Dynatrace]({{< ref "otel_dynatrace" >}}), [Jaeger]({{< ref "otel_jaeger" >}}) and [New Relic]({{< ref "otel_new_relic" >}}).
```

#### Which Spans Will Be Exported?

- When set to `false`:
  Detailed tracing set to `false` generates two spans encapsulating the entire request lifecycle. These spans include attributes and tags but lack fine-grained details. The parent span represents the total time from request reception to response and the child span represent the time spent in the upstream service.

{{< img src="/img/distributed-tracing/opentelemetry/detailed-tracing-false.png" alt="Detailed Tracing Disabled" width="800px" >}}

- When set to true:
  Detailed tracing set to `true` creates a span for each middleware involved in request processing. These spans offer detailed insights, including the time taken for each middleware execution and the sequence of invocations.

{{< img src="/img/distributed-tracing/opentelemetry/detailed-tracing-true.png" alt="Detailed Tracing Enabled" width="800px" >}}

By choosing the appropriate setting, you can customize the level of tracing detail to suit your monitoring needs.

## Understanding Your Traces

> Tyk Gateway exposes a helpful set of *span attributes* and *resource attributes* with the generated spans. These attributes helpful to understand your API requests better. To get a clearer picture, you need to look at what specific actions are happening and the context in which they occur. This is span and resource attributes play a significant role.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tyk Gateway exposes a helpful set of *span attributes* and *resource attributes* with the generated spans. These attributes provide useful insights for analysing your API requests. A clear analysis can be obtained by observing the specific actions and associated context within each request/response. This is where span and resource attributes play a significant role.
```

### Resource Attributes

> Resource attributes provide contextual information about the entity that produced the telemetry data. Tyk exposes following resource attributes:

Reviewer: In the context of Tyk OpenTelemetry what entity(s) produce the telemetry data? Is it a Gateway instance?

Author: yes, the Gateway instance
